Migration of Contact Picker API article (#1620)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/contact-picker/index.md

---
title: A contact picker for the web

> subhead: The Contact Picker API is an on-demand API that allows users to select entries from their contact list and share limited details of the selected entries with a website. It allows users to share only what they want, when they want, and makes it easier for users to reach and connect with their friends and family.

Author: Done

authors:
  - petelepage
description: Access to the user's contacts has been a feature of native apps since (almost) the dawn of time. The Contact Picker API is an on-demand API  that allows users to select an entry or entries from their contact list and share limited details of the selected contact(s) with a website. It allows users to share only what they want, when they want, and makes it easier for users to reach and connect with their friends and family.
date: 2019-08-07
updated: 2019-10-08
tags:
  - post # post is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - capabilities
  - contacts
  - chrome77
hero: hero.jpg

> alt: Telephone on yellow background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alt: Telephone on yellow background.
draft: true
```

---

{% Aside %}
  The Contact Picker API begins an origin trial in Chrome 77
  (stable in September) as part of our capabilities project. We'll keep this
  post updated as the implementation progresses.
{% endAside %}

## What is the Contact Picker API? {: #what }

<style>
  #video-demo { max-height: 600px; }
  figcaption { font-size: small; }
</style>

<a href="https://storage.googleapis.com/webfundamentals-assets/contact-picker/contact-picker.mp4">

>   <video id="video-demo" loop autoplay muted class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:50%"

Reviewer 2: For images and videos without a solid border it can help to add the `w-screenshot` class. I'd suggest adding it to this element and a few of the other screenshots further down the page.

Author: I added it to the `img` vs `figure`, would be nice if I didn't have to add a class for that to happen ;)

Reviewer 2: Would you prefer a shortcode? Images that do have a border don't need it, so it's one of those things that is dependent on the content.

Author: No, don't need a short code. Mostly just want to be clear when to use `w-screenshot` and when not.

>   <video id="video-demo" loop autoplay muted class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:50%"

Reviewer 2: This video is a little tricky on mobile because it's so vertical.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1066253/66456903-cd433700-ea23-11e9-814c-6006a0571afa.png)

One idea would be to hide it on smaller viewports?

Reviewer: @robdodson regarding "hiding it on smaller viewports" is that site code that you will add or is this something that Pete should do? How should he do that?

Also, just brainstorming other ideas, rather than hiding on mobile maybe we can just link out to the video?

Reviewer 2: Added a comment above to offer another suggestion on how to properly center the video. I suspect if we do that then it'll look ok.

Author: I think we've got this fixed now

which phone number to call. Or a social network could help a user discover
which friends have already joined.

{% Aside 'caution' %}
  We've put a lot of thought into the design and implementation of the
  Contact Picker API to ensure that the browser will only share exactly
  what people choose. See the [Security and Privacy](#security-considerations)
  section below.
{% endAside %}

## Current status {: #status }

| Step                                       | Status                       |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------- |
| 1. Create explainer                        | [Complete][explainer]        |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification   | [In Progress][spec]          |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design     | [In progress][spec]          |
| **4. Origin trial**                        | **Started in Chrome 77** <br> Expected to run through Chrome 80. |
| 5. Launch                                  | Not started                  |

## Using the Contact Picker API {: #how-to-use }

The Contact Picker API requires a single API call with an options parameter
that specifies the types of contact information you want.

> {% Aside 'codelab' %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Aside %}
```

Per https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/1614/files#r333137069 Rob wants to reserve the codelab aside for web.dev codelabs. So maybe just change it to a regular aside, or change it to a normal paragraph.

  Check out the [Contact Picker API demo](https://contact-picker.glitch.me)
  and view the
  [source](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/contact-picker?path=demo.js:20:0).
{% endAside %}

### Enabling via chrome://flags

To experiment with the Contact Picker API locally, without an origin
trial token, enable the `#enable-experimental-web-platform-features` flag
in `chrome://flags`.

> ### Enabling support during the origin trial phase {: #origin-trial }

Reviewer: I updated #1618 to mention that we should use the origin trial `include` here when that lands

Starting in Chrome 77, the Contact Picker API is available as an origin
trial on Chrome for Android. Origin trials allow you to try new features
and give feedback on their usability, practicality, and effectiveness, both

> to us, and to the web standards community. For more information, see the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the Chrome team, and to the web standards community. For more information, see the
```

Avoiding "we" per Rob's rationale in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/1614/files#r333143069

```js
const props = ['name', 'email', 'tel'];
const opts = {multiple: true};

try {
  const contacts = await navigator.contacts.select(props, opts);
  handleResults(contacts);
} catch (ex) {
  // Handle any errors here.
}
```

The Contacts Picker API can only be called from a [secure][secure-contexts],
top-level browsing context, and like other powerful APIs, it requires a
user gesture.

### Handling the results

The Contact Picker API returns an array of contacts, and each contact
includes an array of the requested properties. If a contact doesn't have
data for the requested property, or the user chooses to opt-out of sharing
a particular property, it returns an empty array.

For example, if a site requests `name`, `email`, and `tel`, and a user
selects a single contact that has data in the name field, provides two
phone numbers, but does not have an email address, the response returned will be:

```json
[{
  "email": [],
  "name": ["Queen O'Hearts"],
  "tel": ["+1-206-555-1000", "+1-206-555-1111"]
}]
```

{% Aside 'caution' %}
  Labels and other semantic information on contact fields are dropped.
{% endAside %}

## Security and permissions {: #security-considerations }

> We've designed and implemented the Contact Picker API using the core

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Chrome team designed and implemented the Contact Picker API using the core
```

Avoiding "we" per Rob's rationale in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/1614/files#r333143069

principles defined in
[Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis],
including user control, transparency, and ergonomics. I'll explain each.

### User control {: #security-control }

Access to the users' contacts is via the picker, and it can only be called with
a user gesture, on a [secure][secure-contexts], top-level browsing context.
This ensures that a site can't show the picker on page load, or randomly show
the picker without any context.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:50%">

>   <img  src="contact-picker-user-choice.jpg">

Reviewer: Please add `alt` tag

  <figcaption>
    Users can choose not to share some properties. In this screenshot, the
    user has unchecked the 'Phone numbers' button. Even though the site
    asked for phone numbers, they will not be shared with the site.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

There's no option to bulk-select all contacts so that users are encouraged
to select only the contacts that they need to share for that particular
website. Users can also control which properties are shared with the site
by toggling the property button at the top of the picker.

<div class="clearfix"></div>

### Transparency {: #security-transparency }

To clarify which contact details are being shared, the picker always
shows the contact's name and icon, plus any properties that the site has
requested. For example, if a site requests `name`, `email`, and `tel`,
all three properties will be shown in the picker. Alternatively,
if a site only requests `tel`, the picker will show only the name, and
telephone numbers.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-left" style="max-width:42%">

>   <img  src="contact-picker-left.jpg">

Reviewer: Please add `alt` tag

  <figcaption>
    Picker, site requesting <code>name</code>, <code>email</code>, and
    <code>tel</code>, one contact selected.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
<figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:42%">

>   <img  src="contact-picker-right.jpg">

Reviewer: Please add `alt` tag

  <figcaption>
    Picker, site requesting only <code>tel</code>, one contact selected.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="clearfix"></div>

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:50%">

>   <img  src="contact-picker-long-press.jpg">

Reviewer: Please add `alt` tag

  <figcaption>
    The result of a long press on a contact.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

A long press on a contact will show all of the information that will be
shared if the contact is selected. (See the Cheshire Cat contact image.)

<div class="clearfix"></div>

### No permission persistence {: #security-persistence }

Access to contacts is on-demand, and not persisted. Each time a site wants
access, it must call `navigator.contacts.select()` with a user gesture,
and the user must individually choose the contact(s) they want to share
with the site.

## Feedback {: #feedback }

> We want to hear about your experiences with the Contact Picker API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Web Platform Incubator Group and the Chrome team want to hear about your experiences with the Contact Picker API.
```

Avoiding "we" per Rob's rationale in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/1614/files#r333143069

### Tell us about the API design

Is there something about the API that doesn't work as expected? Or
are there missing methods or properties that you need to implement your idea?

* File a spec issue on the [WICG Contact Picker API GitHub repo][issues],
  or add your thoughts to an existing issue.

### Problem with the implementation?

Did you find a bug with Chrome's implementation? Or is the implementation
different from the spec?

* File a bug at [https://new.crbug.com][new-bug]. Be sure to include as much
  detail as you can, provide simple instructions for reproducing the bug, and
  set *Components* to `Blink>Contacts`. [Glitch](https://glitch.com) works great
  for sharing quick and easy repros.

### Planning to use the API?

> Are you planning to use the Contact Picker API? Your public support helps us

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Are you planning to use the Contact Picker API? Your public support helps the Chrome team
```

Avoiding "we" per Rob's rationale in https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/1614/files#r333143069

---
title: A contact picker for the web
subhead: The Contact Picker API provides an easy way for users to share contacts from their contact list.
authors:
  - petelepage
description: Access to the user's contacts has been a feature of native apps since (almost) the dawn of time. The Contact Picker API is an on-demand API  that allows users to select an entry or entries from their contact list and share limited details of the selected contact(s) with a website. It allows users to share only what they want, when they want, and makes it easier for users to reach and connect with their friends and family.
date: 2019-08-07
updated: 2019-10-10
tags:
  - post # post is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - capabilities
  - contacts
  - chrome77
hero: hero.jpg
alt: Telephone on yellow background.
draft: true
---

{% Aside %}
  The Contact Picker API begins an origin trial in Chrome 77
  (stable in September) as part of our capabilities project. We'll keep this
  post updated as the implementation progresses.
{% endAside %}

## What is the Contact Picker API? {: #what }

<style>
  #video-demo { max-height: 600px; }
</style>

> <a href="https://storage.googleapis.com/webfundamentals-assets/contact-picker/contact-picker.mp4">

Author: Is it OK to leave them as is for now, I don't see that bucket going away any time soon.

>   <video id="video-demo" loop autoplay muted

Reviewer 2: I think if you wrap this in a figure element instead of putting the w-figure classes on the video, then it will center properly on tablets and mobile.

Author: Will do

         class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right w-screenshot"
         poster="contact-picker-demo.jpg">
    <source type="video/webm"
            src="https://storage.googleapis.com/webfundamentals-assets/contact-picker/contact-picker.webm">
    <source type="video/mp4"
            src="https://storage.googleapis.com/webfundamentals-assets/contact-picker/contact-picker.mp4">
  </video>
</a>

Access to the user's contacts has been a feature of native apps since
(almost) the dawn of time. It's one of the most common feature requests
I hear from web developers, and is often the key reason they build a native
app.

> The Contact Picker API is an on-demand API that allows users to

Author: It's not a bad idea, we link to them in other places within the doc, but I'll add the link at the top too.

select entries from their contact list and share limited details of the
selected entries with a website. It allows users to share only what they
want, when they want, and makes it easier for users to reach and connect
with their friends and family.

For example, a web-based email client could use the Contact Picker API to
select the recipient(s) of an email. A voice-over-IP app could look up
which phone number to call. Or a social network could help a user discover
which friends have already joined.

{% Aside 'caution' %}

>   We've put a lot of thought into the design and implementation of the

Reviewer 2: Suggest swapping "we" with "the Chrome team" here.

principles defined in
[Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis],
including user control, transparency, and ergonomics. I'll explain each.

### User control {: #security-control }

Access to the users' contacts is via the picker, and it can only be called with
a user gesture, on a [secure][secure-contexts], top-level browsing context.
This ensures that a site can't show the picker on page load, or randomly show
the picker without any context.

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right">
  <img src="contact-picker-user-choice.jpg" class="w-screenshot"
       alt="Screen shot, users can choose which properties to share.">
  <figcaption>
    Users can choose not to share some properties. In this screenshot, the
    user has unchecked the 'Phone numbers' button. Even though the site
    asked for phone numbers, they will not be shared with the site.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

There's no option to bulk-select all contacts so that users are encouraged
to select only the contacts that they need to share for that particular
website. Users can also control which properties are shared with the site
by toggling the property button at the top of the picker.

> <div class="clearfix"></div>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div class="w-clearfix"></div>
```

Because we have to pull in devsite's stylesheets, this class works, but it wouldn't when we move to the v2 version because we ditch their CSS. Our styles are prefixed with `w-` to avoid clashing. We created a `w-clearfix` that you can use.

Author: Got it, will fix.

Author: fixed

### Transparency {: #security-transparency }

To clarify which contact details are being shared, the picker always
shows the contact's name and icon, plus any properties that the site has
requested. For example, if a site requests `name`, `email`, and `tel`,
all three properties will be shown in the picker. Alternatively,
if a site only requests `tel`, the picker will show only the name, and
telephone numbers.

> <figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-left" style="max-width:42%">

Author: Thanks, that's exactly what I was trying to do! 

I was trying to the DevSite style which didn't require a wrapper col, there `attempt-left/attempt-right`, would automatically handle across screen sizes/etc.

    <code>tel</code>, one contact selected.
  </figcaption>
</figure>
<figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:42%">
  <img src="contact-picker-right.jpg" class="w-screenshot"
       alt="Screen shot of picker for site requesting only phone numbers.">
  <figcaption>
    Picker, site requesting only <code>tel</code>, one contact selected.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="clearfix"></div>

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right">
  <img src="contact-picker-long-press.jpg" class="w-screenshot"
       alt="Screen shot of picker when a contact is long-pressed.">
  <figcaption>
    The result of a long press on a contact.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

A long press on a contact will show all of the information that will be
shared if the contact is selected. (See the Cheshire Cat contact image.)

<div class="clearfix"></div>

### No permission persistence {: #security-persistence }

Access to contacts is on-demand, and not persisted. Each time a site wants
access, it must call `navigator.contacts.select()` with a user gesture,
and the user must individually choose the contact(s) they want to share
with the site.

> ## Feedback {: #feedback }

Reviewer 2: Something to think about if you want to iterate on these posts...

Michael made a nice Details component to support the PWA checklist.
https://deploy-preview-1556--web-dev-staging.netlify.com/handbook/web-dev-components/#details

It might look neat to try to put these sections into Details components to see if they render as a kind of stacked list. I'm not sure if it would look good or bad, but wanted to mention it as a possibility 😁

Author: It is pretty, but I don't want to hide the content and make a user click to open it.
